One important part of understanding vuejs is to understand how it handles changes, so how it detects
that change has occurred and how it then updates the page because in the end, that is what it's doing, it's
not really loading it, it's updating parts of it through javascript.
We have the vue instance on one side and the dom on the other side,
I already explained that the vue instance creates and holds a template either derived from the html code
or passed with this template property. In this template, we might have a message where we say hello
and this of course also is represented in the dom
after this has been rendered and we might have other properties used in the dom or used in our template,
like this but then finally being printed or painted to dom.
Now what if we change the message? We could think that vuejs constantly watches the message and
updates the dom if required.
The first part is right,
each property we set up has its own watcher and I explained this earlier, that vuejs when we pass
an object to the constructor creates these watchers for all the properties in our data property, thus
allowing us or thus allowing itself to watch for changes to these properties which announce or which
means that it probably needs to update something. But it's not updating like that,
it's not constantly updating everything in the real dom just because it changed,
think of this, if we changed message and set it to hello again, then technically we touched this property,
we changed it but we changed it to the same value as before. It would re-render the part of the dom or worst
of all, it may be the complete dom and that would be a real performance hit because accessing the real
dom is the part which takes the most performance,
javascript is super fast but accessing the dom is super slow
so we want to do this as seldom as possible.
Hence this is not what it does neither for message nor for any other property,
instead it has an extra layer, the virtual dom and on the virtual dom,
this is a representation of the real dom, kind of a copy but a copy parsed in javascript and therefore
very very quick to be accessed. Vuejs then simply checks these or watches these changes, writes them to this
virtual dom
if we update message for example to hello everyone, even though it might have been set to hello everyone
before it, it recreates this virtual dom
and then it takes the difference between the template and the virtual dom and only updates this part
in the real dom, so it knows which property did change,
which part of the template is affected, what is the current state of the dom represented by the virtual
dom,
okay I got this heading here or this paragraph or whatever which actually needs to be updated
and now it goes out to the actual dom, to the real dom and changes this paragraph,
and since it also updated the virtual dom, it now automatically got an up to date representation of
the real dom without having to take a full copy of that again, because again it constantly updates this.
This is how this change detection with the watchers and updating with the virtual dom works which
makes vuejs very performant and very fast.